Hello, everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the,
the Center. I'm your host, Ricardo Lob. And today
I'm joined by Doctor Mi Bac Coen. He's Professor
Emeritus of Comparative Literature in France, at the UN
in French, at the University of Washington in Seattle.
And today we're focusing on his book, Freud's Thinking
and introduction. So, Doctor Bia Capson, welcome to the
show. It's a pleasure to everyone.
It's a pleasure for me too.
So tell us first. Um WHAT is the premise
of this book actually? Because I know that you've
written more uh uh other books on Freud uh
his work, uh he as a person, what were
you trying to achieve with this one?
Well, this book is a little different from the
other ones that I wrote on Freud because it
was actually a commission from a French uh publisher
uh edit Ellipse. Uh And uh they have a,
it's, it's a, it's a publisher that is specialized
in uh academic textbooks. And so they have a,
a series with that is uh intended for uh
students in philosophy. Uh AND they have a series
of monographs on philosophers, Plato Aristotle, Kant Nietzsche. And
so forth and they wanted me to write a
book on uh a little book, a textbook on,
on Freud because as you may know, in France,
uh Freud is taught as a philosopher. Uh And
so usually I would not, you know, uh I
would not accept such an invitation for that after
having thought little about it, I thought it was
an interesting project. Would I be able to write
a user friendly uh textbook on Freud? Uh TAKING
into account everything that has been written on him,
uh taking into account the, the critical studies Freud
studies from the, you know, the late this the
last 40 years. And so, uh it was a
challenge in a way. Uh And finally I accepted
it and that, that was a project. And so
the question of course, with which I start, the
book was Freud, a philosopher stems from the fact
that it was, you know, intended, this book is
intended for students in philosophy or students in philosophy
in France and then it was translated into English.
So it's um you know, and, and that accounts
for the fact that the book is structured like
a textbook, you know, you have all the, the
main concepts and I try to explain this concept
as better as best as I can without putting
forward my own ideas, my own pet ideas about
Freud and psych analysis. Mhm
No, I, I mean, if you, if you will
allow me to be a little bit provocative here.
It's very interesting that you mentioned that in France
they teach him as a philosopher because here in
Portugal we have anthro some anthropology degrees where they
also teach. Right. So, it's very interesting because either
he was a poly or people can interpret his
work whatever way they want. So I'm not
sure. Yeah. Yeah. Sure. Yeah, I agree. And, and
of course, if you, you know, I used to
teach in, in the US and uh and then,
you know, Freud is not taught at all any
longer in psychiatry or in psychology. Uh BUT in
literary uh departments. Yes.
Yeah. So we might come back to this question
about exactly what kind of intellectual Freud was uh
toward the end of our conversation. But let's go
here through some of the, some of his main
ideas slash theory. So, of course, one of the
biggest ones and probably the one is uh most
well known for is the unconscious. But what were
Freud's ideas about the unconscious? What was the unconscious
for
him? It is a big question. It's a uh
anyway, uh uh people usually think that Freud discovered
the countries. Um NOW that's incorrect. He didn't discover
the unconscious. He may be, he constructed something that
I would call the Freudian unconscious, which is a
very specific way of uh uh understanding uh the
unconscious. But the the idea of the unconscious stems
from uh from other sources, notably, uh in the
19th century or all kinds of speculations and theories
about what was called the cerebral unconscious. And that
was uh a very important uh concept uh in
uh 19th century neurophysiology stems from the discovery of
the reflex arc, uh you know, the the reflex
function of the spinal cord and uh which of
course is an unconscious uh uh automatic uh uh
function. And some people uh extended that uh idea
to uh not to the final uh court, but
to uh other psychic, psychical functions. And so you
had this idea that is shared by all kinds
of people. Shao Mosle Bernheim, et cetera. You have
the idea that the, the, the main psychic activity
is a reflex, automatic uh activity, which they called
the, the psychological automatism and consciousness or the ego
as it was called at the time, uh It
emerges from these unconscious reflex uh uh psychical uh
acts uh by inhibiting it uh inhibiting them. Uh
So, the, the, the there was a whole paradigm
uh which I would call the reflex paradigm uh
that uh is based on the contrast between reflex
and inhibition, consciousness is based on an inhibition of
the automatic reflex activity of the mind. And so,
um the, the, so this is the concept of
the unconscious at the time when Freud goes to
uh Paris and studies with uh Shaco, who was
one of the main advocates of this whole uh
reflex uh paradigm. Uh AND it's quite clear that
at the beginning of his career until I would
say 1892 and 83 This is the concept of
the unconscious that Freud deals with. And then at
one point, uh we can talk about it later.
He, he, he, he, he shifts to this idea
that the unconscious, it is not just inhibited normally
by the country's ego. It is actually created by
what it calls a repression. Uh We passionate at,
at first is just another name for inhibition. Uh
But that is when Freud really comes into his
own and comes up with this idea that the
unconscious is a repressed, incon uh we have ideas,
fantasies, uh etcetera that are repressed by the country's
ego by consciousness, something that is called the unconscious.
So basically, that's, that's the beginning of Freud's idea
of the unconscious. And then you have to add
to that that because uh the unconscious is repressed
according to Freud, uh you have to um to
decipher uh symptoms, lapses of the tongue, uh Freud
and slips, et cetera in order to get access
to what is repressed. So, uh the Freudian country
is not only a repressed unconscious, uh It is
also uh an unconscious that can only be known,
made conscious through interpretation.
Mhm And, and so since you're already mentioning repression
and how it is associated, at least in Freud's
theorizing with these ideas about the unconscious. Um Is
it that the other defense mechanisms that he proposed
are also associated with how the unconscious works
well. Yeah, I mean, all the other defense mechanisms
that he lives are basically forms of repression that
are different techniques are used by the L to
repress according to him, uh uh some ideas uh
but they, they basically all come down to uh
making sure that the unconscious doesn't become conscious. And
he, he, he has several statements to that effect
is that, that's, that's basically what all these defense
mechanisms are about. And he, he also calls uh
repression to the cornerstone of psychoanalysis. It's really the,
you know, uh if, if you remove that idea,
then there is no psychoanalysis any longer.
And what were his ideas about uh trauma? Because
he also talked about trauma a lot. What was
trauma for him? And what sort of psychological effects
did it supposedly have?
Ok. Uh His idea of trauma stemmed directly from
Charcot, Jean Martin Charcot items. Again, uh Freud went
to study in the Charcot in Paris at the
Hospital of La Salle Petrie. And Jacque was at
the time uh studying uh his theoria uh and
the hysteria for him was a uh neurological uh
disease um that basically consisted in a regression to
use a fraudulent term to the famous reflex, automatic
uh uh activity of the mind. Uh And Jacco
listed various agent provocateur as you call them uh
provoking agents or trigger events that would cause people
to uh to uh go from, to, to, to,
to regress again uh to an automatic reflex, psychological
activity. Uh And one of these agent provocateur was
a physical shock, more nervous shock as uh shaku
uh put it. So people would have a fall,
they would be knocked out by something and suddenly
they would, you know, uh become some kind of
psychical autometer. Um And this is what uh uh
shako called traumatic hysteria. So it was a special
kind of hysteria caused by a physical trauma. And
then he also called uh mentioned some psychological traumas.
But the idea that there is a shock that
caused the the the mind to split to dissociate
as uh shock could put it and, and then
you had, you know, uh hysteria. So
sorry for interrupting, but just to ask you, but
hysteria was attributed only to women, right?
No, no, no, no. OK. OK. OK.
So go, go ahead because that's interesting.
Yeah, I know. I actually shao I thought that
uh you also had a male hysteria and he
was very adamant about the fact that hysteria was
not a female malady due to the uh female
sexuality. He, he thought it was both a male
and a female. Yeah. Um And of course your
question uh uh stems from the fact that Freud
uh who was not a psychiatrist, not a neurologist,
uh a hospital uh clinician, but a private neurologist.
Uh uh THEY have arts as I said in,
in German, his clientele at the beginning was mainly
female. And so that's why people usually associate concept
of hysteria with, uh, with, uh, women. But it's,
it's, it's not, uh, you know, in Shao it's
not the case
but, but in Freud it's also not the case
or is
it? No, it's not the case either. He was
from the very beginning. He was a true coach
and no, he, he had uh he had uh
male patients uh deemed uh hysteric uh hysterical. But
uh no, it's just that his, his main clientele
at the beginning was uh uh women, the uh
upper class women. Mhm.
And so going back to drama then, uh what
were rights ideas about it?
So at, at first, uh he starts with Shao's
uh ideas. Uh SO, uh and after a while,
um so he, he, he based his whole uh
therapy at the beginning uh on this idea of
dissociation. Uh HE assumed that his hysterical patients, female
and male patients uh had been subjected to some
kind of trauma that had caused them to regress
to an automatic reflex kind of psychical activity. And
so he uh he started uh using hypnosis as
Jacque had done uh to um access the dissociated
part of the psyche. So you hypnosis for Shau
and also then for, for Freud was a way
to get access to the cyclical the, the automatic
reflex uh part of the, of the mind And
um, and so he, he, he shock, we had
this whole idea that he build in his history
were actually the same thing. And so use as
hypnos, please puts uh his patients in a state
of some embolism and as it was uh called
at the time, uh and then he tried to
desist as he puts it, the, the trauma, the
memory of the trauma, which is actually the cause
of the uh of the uh the whole hysteria
uh uh is, is so to speak, uh uh
removed through suggestion. Now I'm not gonna go into,
into details. Basically, it's a kind of brainwashing. Uh
YOU, you, you access the unconscious and you remove
the fixed idea as uh uh Shao and Jan
put it uh that is at the origin of
the symptoms. And then he realized uh pretty soon
that this didn't work. I mean, he would uh
put his patients and the hypnosis uh access the
trauma, we try to remove it by suggestion, but
it didn't, it didn't, the symptoms would recur would
come back. Um So he, it is then that
he, he, he, he, he came up with this
whole idea that uh you know, the, the cause,
the real cause of the, the symptoms, hysterical symptoms
is not uh just shock, traumatic shock and dissociation,
but it's repression is, is because the conscious ego
decides to, to, to, to push back to inhibit
uh certain traumatic ideas that uh you have uh
hysterical symptoms. Therefore, the goal was then to uh
not to, to, to have the, the, the patient
forget about the trauma. It was quite the contrary,
it was to uh unearth the memory of the
trauma and bring it back to countries. So that's
the whole point of Freud's new therapy psychotherapy, which
he calls psychoanalysis after a while. And, and so
trauma then becomes a traumatic memory. Uh It's a
memory of a trauma which can be physical but
mostly psychological uh for Freud. And after a while
uh in his uh in his uh uh psychotherapy,
he, he, he, he realizes, no, not, he realizes,
he, he, he, he, he, he, he obtains from
his patients, memories of trauma uh that were not
just psychological traumas due to some kind of emotional
uh uh shock, but memories of very early dramas
in childhood. Mhm Sexual uh sexual uh traumas. And
so that is the beginning of Freud's famous uh
theory of seduction, which holds that uh hysteria and
also uh neurasthenia and obsessional neurosis are caused by
um uh traumas, sexual traumas uh dating back to
uh early childhood. And here I have to, to,
to uh add that this takes place at a
moment when Freud gets very interested in his friend,
Bill and Flea's series uh which were not at
all uh based on uh uh drama, which was
not at all. Neurophysiological uh theories such as Shakos
J and so forth. There were theological theories. Uh,
POLICE had a whole theory about, uh, basically, uh,
life and death based on bios, uh, which is
an idea that he got from, uh, from Darwin
and other, uh, Darwin thinkers. Uh, IT'S about, uh,
uh, sexual biorhythms, uh, think of, uh, uh, uh,
female, uh, women's, uh, uh, um, are called, uh,
anyway, uh, in a sexual cycle, uh, of 28
days. Uh, YES, next time. Uh, AND uh uh
please said ideas about another male sexual cycle of
23 days, et cetera. And the whole point of
uh of uh thesis ideas was that basically our
whole life is governed by these sexual cycles starting
from early childhood. So he said that for example,
teething uh aury diarrheas were governed by these cycles
by AR RMS. And these were sexual in nature
which I implied, for example, that in early childhood,
you already had sexual uh events or sexual functions
uh playing a part. So, Freud was quite interested
in all these ideas and that is how I
think he got to a place where he would
uh say that uh traumas, sexual traumas were uh
traumas were sexual in nature and not only sexual
in nature, but uh going back to early uh
child uh early child sexual abuse, you see, it's
still, it's still uh keeps this idea that you
have a sexual trauma. Basically, someone abuses a child
which causes a trauma which causes a memory that
is unconscious et cetera. But at one point and
that is the famous uh uh click, you know,
that, that, that is the start the starting point
of mature psychoanalysis. At one point, he, he, he
decides that basically his whole idea of trauma, sexual
trauma in childhood uh is, is bo uh is
uh doesn't hold up. And he then moves to
eles biological theory that says that actually, uh if
his patients talked about and memories of uh early
sexual abuse, it was not because they had actually
been abused uh traumatized, but it was a fantasy.
They wanted to be uh abused by, among other
things, the father. Uh uh And so suddenly you,
you, you, there's a shift from uh this trauma
paradigm that uh Freud um uh uh used up
to a certain point. Uh He moved to a
more biologically uh uh uh biological uh paradigm which
he inherits from uh from fleece who himself was
inherited it from uh evolutionary uh thinking. And so
you, you, Freud kept using the, the, the, the
concept of trauma. But for him, after a while,
it became just a trigger, uh maybe traumatized uh
uh in real life. Uh But it, it, it
triggers actually uh uh your fantasy life and uh
all these uh triggers, all these uh drives biological
drives that um that are fundamentally sexual in, in
nature. So that in a nutshell that is how
he moves from uh a shakin uh concept of
trauma to uh to the idea of sexual uh
drives being, you know, uh the, the, the main
cause of uh repression and therefore of neurosis and,
and other mental illness, illnesses.
A and so this is when we get into
things like the Odis complex and the castration complex.
Right. Yes. Exactly. Exactly. You know, uh when you
read, uh histories of psychoanalysis, you are usually told,
um, that Freud discovered the Oedipus Complex. Uh WHEN
he decided to move around the seduction theory that
held that Children who are actually abused by, among
other things that they, that uh to uh the
more mature theory that he holds that uh uh
that in fact, these uh so called sexual traumas
were fantasies emanating the uh from the, the inner
biological uh uh activity of the mind. Uh And
so you, this is indeed how Freud always described
his discovery of the Oedipus complex. He said that
his, his patients had told him that there had
been abused, et cetera and he realized that in
fact, it was just fantasy. But when you, when
you read uh his letters to his friend flee,
uh you which you wrote it at the time,
you see that actually he was already talking about
the ODP, not the ODP complex, but he, he
talked about this whole idea of the prohibition of
incest and parasite uh months before he abandoned his
uh seduction theory. Uh AND, and his, his statements
about, uh, that are purely speculative. Uh, IT is,
he, he has this, I spec, I mean, he,
uh, he is, uh, talking about the, the, the
prohibition of incest, the fact that humans usually prohibit
human societies prohibit uh incest. And, and he says
that, ok, this, uh, uh must have to do
with the fact that in order to, for so
society, uh to emerge, you need to, uh, to,
uh, to encourage exo Gammy. That is to say
the fact that you, you don't breathe into your
own kin, you breathe uh uh outside. And so
uh so, and, and this is a purely, you
know, it's speculative idea. He, he speculates about the
origins of, of uh of humanity uh in the
context of his exchanges about uh uh phylogeny and
ontogeny. That is to say to the, to the
uh the individual uh biological development that is supposed
to recapitulate repeat the phylogenetic, that is the evolution
of the species. So these are speculations based on
uh heckles ernst heckles, uh so called biogenetic law
that held at the time that indeed the individual
biological development uh repeats, recapitulates the, the various stages
of the evolution of the species. And so it,
it, the AUS complex, it stems from all these
ideas. Yeah, I could go into further details, but
it's basically a, an idea speculation based on uh
on, on this biogenetic law. And uh and this
is what then Freud uh uh uh easily uh
imports into his own new theory and, and his
new theory is a theory about the evolution of
human sexuality, right? Uh
But uh before we
get into that, yeah,
before we get into that, uh about the Oedipus
complex and this general idea of ones being attracted,
sexually, attracted to their own parents, he, he also,
he also didn't get that at all from any
evolutionary thinkers, right? Because from an evolutionary perspective, uh
of course, back then, in the 19, at least
in the late 19th century, I don't know if
people were already aware of the Western Mark effect,
for example. And the fact that if you reproduce
uh with uh people that are genetically close to
you, you increase the probability of having uh offspring
with health issues and all of that. But uh
but even if they weren't aware of that, I
don't think that any evolutionary thinker uh uh suggested
that we had evolved to feeling sexually attracted to
one's own uh parents
or you had, you had, you had all kinds
of theories about uh exo and you find this
in Darwin, you find this in Andrew Lang, you
find in other Atkinson, uh all these people, by
the way, uh who would be quoted by Freud
and Lang uh in Oman and Taboo. And so
the, the whole, the problem of how it come
that you, you don't marry your mother uh uh
was very much uh uh there, I mean, people
were thinking about this and trying to give to
this whole idea uh uh uh an evolutionary basis.
So it's not, it's not uh by accident that
Freud talks about that. Of course, his whole idea
of an Oedipus complex, uh you know, uh uh
they said that, that we having reached this evolutionary
stage still being, you know, like uh apes wanting
to uh to, to uh uh to have sex
with uh our janitor. Uh This is new, I
mean, this is right, of course, this is original.
But, but you have to, you have to understand
that it stems these uh speculations and at the
time. Mhm
So you were about to get into his general
theory of sexuality. So tell us about it now.
So it all stems from his exchanges with Willhelm
flee William Fries, as I said, had a whole
a biological theory. There was not only a, you
know, a, a theory about sexuality, it was a
theory of life and death. It was a very
ambitious and speculative theory. Um But as I said,
he, he, he the implication of his uh theory
uh was among other things that uh there was
a kind of uh um infantile sexuality. So, the
implication of the thesis theories was that there was
a kind of infantile sexuality. Uh And by that,
he just meant, you know, biological cycles that uh
were at play already uh in infancy uh fried
and, and Fred developed this. Um And he assumed
that the, the ontogenetic development of the individual uh
basically repeated uh the phylogenetic evolution of the species.
And so that a baby uh and a child
goes through all the phases of the sexual history
of the species. Ok. And, and then he comes
up with this idea that repression, which uh uh
he talked about at first as a kind of
psychological uh mechanism. Uh REPRESSION was indeed based on
the, the evolution of the, the species. Uh He
assumed he, he, he, he speculated that uh certainly
sexual sexual zones, uh they were of interest back
then. For example, the anal zone, the oral zone
uh which were part of the, the, the, the,
the sexuality of our ancestors. These exosome were abandoned
when humans uh adopted the erect posture. Mm And
so that led according to Freud to all kinds
of uh mechanisms discussed shame and so forth that
that had to do with these abandoned erotogenic zones,
oral ale, et cetera. And then he continues by
uh assuming that in Children, uh Children go through
the same evolution. So they have at first an
oral sexuality, then anal sexuality, et cetera, et cetera.
And then they reach the point of uh the
erection, the erect posture, which is uh the point
uh of what he calls the primary repression or
the organic repression uh which uh uh uh consisting,
you know, uh repressing all these previous sexual interests.
Uh THAT is, uh, according to Freud, what happens
around the age of five is what he calls
the latency period, which was, by the way, a
concept that he got from, uh, from fees. Um,
AND that is where, uh, the, you have the,
the Oedipus complex. Let's see when there is a,
uh, an interest in genitality. Uh, AND, and that
is also when the whole thing is, uh, repressed
and then it, uh, you have this sexual latency
that uh continues until the beginning of uh puberty.
And then you have uh the, you know, access
to normal uh genitality. So, in a nutshell, that
is Freud's theory of sexuality, as he uh uh
uh lays it out in his three essays on
the theory of sexuality, which came out in 1905.
And then, you know, uh the theory evolved, there
were other uh additions to, to, to, to the
theory, but that is the core of the whole
theory. It's a biological psycho, biological theory based on
uh on, on, on Hans Heckle's uh biogenetic law.
Uh The recapitulation of autogenic by uh uh philo
by Ony.
And what did they mean by drives? And what
different kinds of drives did they identify?
So, uh the concept of drive, um by the
way, again, it, if you, if you read his
correspondence with fleece, you see that this whole concept
comes from uh fleece's ideas was also speaking of
drives or impulses as he puts it. So, what
is the drive? Uh Ale in German? A drive
is an instinct. That's it. Uh, IN, in, in
German at the time. Uh You used uh uh
two terms instinct, uh tribe uh to, to refer
to the same thing, which is what we usually
think of for the instinct is to say a
biologically uh determined. Uh And here he hereditary, uh
uh uh urge, uh behavioral urge, the sexual instinct,
the, the aggressive instinct, you, you have uh uh
uh behaviors that are uh how do you say
that are um automatic? Uh And I use the
term automatic uh on purpose because indeed, uh the
whole notion of uh drive of three in Freud,
uh it is linked to this whole idea of
an automatic uh uh reflex activity of the mind
which itself is based on uh a recapitulation of
uh previous phases of uh of uh the, the
human evolution of the species. Uh AN instinct. When,
when you read, for example, uh uh his, his
text uh uh instinct and vicissitudes of instincts that
is how it translated into, into English. Uh You
see, he, he, he, he, he, it says very
explicitly that an instinct is a reflex. Uh He,
he mentioned the, the, the reflex act to say
that when you have an exaltation that comes from
the outside, uh you have a reflex that uh
tends to put back, push back the excitation uh
uh to, to to the, to the outside, the
M and a drive is an instinct. It's the
same term. Uh It, it comes from the inside.
It's an internal endo genetic uh put from the,
from the inside. And the problem with these uh
instincts with these drives is that you cannot escape
the internal, therefore, you cannot uh discharge them in
a reflex way, the same, the same way. But
it's a reflex. It's, it's basically something, a reflex
uh that is uh inherited from uh uh from
the evolution of the, of the species. Um And
so this is what a drive is. Uh WE,
we in English, you translate this as, as drive
uh rather than uh instinct. Striking the first, you
know, uh f for, for translator uh into English.
Actually, he, he used the term instinct and he
was right, because there is no reason to translate
a tree uh uh as drive rather than instinct.
It's the same thing. Um uh So, but that,
that is, you know, a drive is a push
uh in, in, in German street means comes from
c push to push. Uh It's an, it's an
urge. Uh So that is what the drive is.
Um And uh iii I insist on this because
uh in a tradition uh interpretive tradition that stems
from Jacques Laco in, in, in France uh c
uh uh 10 to, to, to, to say that
uh the Freud, Andre Freud. And uh it has
nothing to do with an instinct is something completely
different. Well, no, uh you read Freud, uh uh
that is what, what he's talking about. Uh And
so you, you asked what kinds of vibes there
were? Well, uh at first you have uh two
kinds of drives in, in Freud, which are basically
the same uh drives that everyone was talking about
at the time. Uh IN the wake of Darwin
and other evolutionary thinkers, they used to say you
have the sexual instinct and uh the self preservation
instinct. So uh this s instinct, uh Freud calls
it the libido. And uh the uh self preservation
instinct is what he calls the ego tribe, your
ego instinct. And then he, his thought evolves. He,
he comes up with other kinds of uh drives,
notably uh the uh the ego libido. Uh At
first, he would uh draw a sharp contrast between
the, the sexual instincts and the ego uh drives.
The ego drive is the drive that depresses the
uh sexual instinct. But then he comes up with
this idea about ego libido. Uh There is a
sexual instinct or drive uh that is concerned uh
with the ego, the ego. Mm What, what Freud
calls the ego becomes an object of a drive.
This is what we call now, narcissist, narcissistic drive.
OK. And then you get to uh the third
theory of the drives uh well known uh the
contrast between uh life drives and uh death drives,
uh which are basically a recapitulation of his whole
uh ideas about drives. Um And I'm sure you
want to ask, you want to ask what, what
it means a test drive.
Yeah. Sure. Uh Also because, uh I, I mean,
at least from my point of view since he
was also influenced by evolutionary thinkers, this idea of
uh having a DEA drive, a sort of self
annihilation drive is a bit weird because it contrasts
with the self preservation uh drive. And also, of
course, if people would kill themselves after they had
reproduced, evolutionarily speaking, OK, that might have worked. But
if it was before I, I will, I'm not
seeing how it would have evolved. So
OK. But you see that is because you don't
understand what he means by desperate. OK? Because indeed
uh the idea, but when you, when you hear
this term death drive, you think that you have
an instinct to die to or maybe to kill
yourself or whatever, that's not what he's talking about.
Not all, actually, he is trying to uh in
a very speculative way. He is trying to come
up with a whole theory of life and death
still based on biological ideas. And he uh what
he calls the delay is quite simply the fact
that all living uh creatures, uh beings uh go
through, goes through cycles. Uh U you are born,
you uh are first a child, then uh an
adult, then you get old and that's why you
die. Ok. That's, it's as simple as that, that
is what he's talking about. The test flight is
quite simply the fact that you tend eventually to
pass. Uh And he gives, he, he, he, what
he, he gives uh as, as examples of, of,
of this, uh is for example, the uh uh
repetitive cycles. Uh THE fact that you have uh
birds that migrate back and forth, Uh You have
uh uh and, and he cites the, the biogenetic
law of uh of Heckle. Uh OUR life is
governed by these cycles. So for him, you have
life, the life instinct, self motivation thing, which tends
to prolong as much as it can life. Uh
But then at one point, uh you uh you
die. So it's not desk life should not be
interpreted as a desire, a psychological desire to die.
It's just biological uh destiny uh of all uh
living beings. They are going to die, dust to
dust as they say in the Bible. Um And,
and that's it. So, uh and of course, he,
he, he, he connects this with uh his uh
previous neurophysiological ideas about energy flowing through the uh
through the, the psychical apparatus as he, as he
puts it. Uh And he connects this with uh
the, the, the pleasure principle, which is, you know,
for him, it's the fact that an energy has
to be discharge from the psychical apparatus. Otherwise, it's
gonna cause a displeasure. And so he uh he,
he, he, he, he, he then comes up with
this idea of uh a repetition, compulsion, repetition, which
is uh beyond uh the pleasure principle. It's a
title of the essay in which he presented his
ideas about this. And, and, and then it gets
very complicated because he contradicts himself. Uh He says
basically that this repetition uh is beyond the pleasure
principle. But in fact, uh the desper is the
major illustration of the pleasure principle, which is the
the the the the extinction of all kinds of
uh of um of excitation. So you see, it's,
it's the desk drive is really a uh it's
a purely theoretical um speculative uh concept based on
biological ideas.
And so uh how does he develop then the
theory of culture? Why was he also uh I
mean, basically how do do his ideas also apply
to culture?
Yeah. Uh USUALLY uh he would, he would present,
I'm sorry, he would present uh his ideas about
literature, about uh art, about culture in general as
uh applications of psychoanalysis and given, given to, to
go and use it. Um WHICH implies of course,
that first we have something called psychoanalysis, which is
the study of uh uh uh of uh psychological
pathology of pathology. Uh And then you have these
ideas are applied to other fields. Um That's not
at all how it works. Uh BECAUSE um psychoanalysis
or let's say Freud's theory uh is from the
very beginning. Um A theory about culture. Why? Because
culture for Freud, he has a very simple concept
of culture. Culture is based on Kago, which means
the renunciation of tribes. So OK, for, for, for
Freud culture is the product of repression, what he
calls repression. Uh And remember uh with repression for
him is in the final analysis is based on
what he calls the organic repression. The primary repression,
which is the fact that uh uh human beings
uh adopted the, the erect posture and therefore uh
repressed, inhibited. Uh All these previous uh sexual uh
uh drives oral, anal, et cetera. Uh And so,
and this idea as, as soon as Freud hits
on this idea in his letter to f to
flee, uh he immediately embarks on speculations about the
origin of culture. Says at the very first time,
he talks about this uh or organic repression to
fleece. He said I am, I think I am
already I have here the origin of, of culture
uh you know, shame, disgust, etcetera. Uh And so
you can see that his, his idea, his, his
theory is not only from the very beginning, psycho
biological, it is also socio biological. This is something
that people don't understand. They think that Ro theory
is a, is a psychological uh uh theory applied
to culture, to society. It's a no, it's a
social biological theory. He wants to explain not only
the, the psychological development. Our psychological develops how our
mind functions. He also wants to, to, to explain
uh how uh human society functions. Where does it
stem from? Well, it stems from the organic repression.
It stems from the, the, it, it is something
that is uh that is part of uh all
biological evolution society uh is part of us, the
evolution of the species, the biological evolution of the
species. And so, uh it's um uh that is
what his uh theory of culture is about. And
of course, it, it is uh based on uh
on uh his developments uh uh in Toto and
Taboo, which is a book uh devoted to the
origin of uh of uh origin of society, origin
of uh the, the, the incest prohibition, which for
him is the cornerstone of, you know, uh society.
And so, um so that, that, that is the,
the point of his late, you know, uh developments
on society and religion on uh on art and
so forth. It, it all goes back for him
to the art event the of uh initiated from
which then the prohibition of incest stands, which is
what he calls the, the, the murder of the
bridal father, which is actually the killing of a
big ape,
right? And so how does then the super ego
come into the picture? What is the super ego?
Exactly? The super ego is uh again, people usually
think that it's kind of psychological uh mechanism that
uh that stems from the what Freud calls the
decline of the Oedipus Complex uh in the evolution
of the China. Um But when you read uh
Freud's essay on the ego and the uh and
the aid in which he presents for the first
time, the concept of the super ego. Um He
uh you see very clearly that it's uh I
mean, this is what he says. And at the
end, he said, the super ego is just a
recapitulation uh at the level of, of uh ontogeny
of the individual development of the phylogenics, genetic uh
event of uh the killing of uh the father.
The primal thought the killing of the primal father
as you know, is, is uh the, the killing
of a big orangutan who has all the uh
the women uh and the, the brothers, younger apes
decide at one point to, to kill him or
kill it. Um BECAUSE uh they want to have
the, the women too. Um And according to Freud,
they then eat him because they are cannibals, which
is a pure speculation on for his part. But
the fact that they eat him, they ingest him,
they do something that uh they incorporate uh him
and then they become the father and they feel
guilty for having killed the father themselves, which is
the beginning of guilt, which is the beginning of
the prohibition of uh of incest and which is
the beginning according to Freud of the whole uh
history of, of the mankind. Now, the superhero, how
does it emerge uh at the decline of the
Odis complex? Well, it emerges according to Freud uh
uh through an identification of the little child uh
with uh the father. So instead of killing the
father says, Freud, the child identifies with the father.
And that is the beginning of the superhero. Now,
it's exactly the same, the same mechanism as the
one that uh is at the basis of the,
the emergence of the, the, the guilt feeling in
totem and taboo. And Freud says it explicitly, he
says, well, actually, the, the what happens at the
decline of the Oedipus Complex is exactly the same
process. It's a repetition of an event that happened
in devolution of uh mankind.
So I have a few final questions to ask
you more general questions about Freud himself, how we
approach, approach things in his work and so on.
So could we say that he was really a
scientist? Was he approaching things scientifically or was he
uh for example, uh speculating coming up with theories,
explanations and then sort of forcing interpretations onto his
clinical material?
Yeah, that's uh that is a question I tried
to address in this little book because again, as
I said, the book is intended was intended initially
to uh students in philosophy. It was Freud, a
philosopher again in France, they study him as a
philosopher. OK. Uh And my answer is yes, he
was a philosopher, but a bad one. BAD one
because he himself so of himself uh as a
scientist uh and for him to be a scientist
meant that you didn't engage in any kind of
speculations, any kind of uh wild a priori hypotheses
about this or that. Um He, he, he, he
claims, you know, from the very beginning, he claims
I'm a scientist, I uh make observations, clinical observations
and on the basis of these uh facts, data
or whatever, uh I come up with a theory
that uh that explains it all. Uh So he,
he, he saw him, he saw himself as a
scientist in uh in the positivist style. Uh WHENEVER
he engages in epistemological considerations, he refers implicitly to
uh ernst mass theories about uh scientific knowledge. You
start with speculations with hypotheses and then you test
them and when uh the uh the facts don't
square with your uh hypothesis, then you remove your
hypothesis and you start uh uh af Freshh. Well,
that is, I would say is uh holds wealth
for natural sciences and it's not, I'm sure. Um
uh But what about uh psychological investigations such as
Freud? Uh You uh do you observe uh a
patient, for example, I start a patient the same
way you observe a chemical reaction? No, you don't.
You have interactions uh with uh uh the patient
um and the patient reacts in a certain way
to what you say what you uh proposes. And
when you uh from a pure historical point of
view, when you, when you look at the way
Freud interacted with his patients, you see that he
didn't just listen to what they were saying. He
was coming up with hypotheses about that case. In
other words, his, his theories and they basically either
they, you know, uh reacted negatively and then they
would say they resist or they would, you know,
uh they would say yes, indeed, doctor you, you're
right. Uh I did want to kill my dad.
Uh And then he would see this as a
confirmation of his theories. And, and then uh so
Freud thought of himself himself as a theorist as
a scientist. In fact, he was not uh because
he was a very, I would say a very
speculative mind who would come with all kinds of
theories that he would just then just test uh
on his patients. But his patients would basically uh
throw back at him his own theories. This is
what many of his peers at the time objected
to. They said that you, you basically suggest to
your patients, your own theories, your theories are based
not on facts but on your own, you know,
suggestions. So um in a nutshell, uh I think
that is why we can uh consider that Freud
was not a scientist. Uh He didn't have the,
the scientists. Um I would say the scientist ethics
consistent trying to disprove, to falsify. As K Papa
would say, uh his, his ideas, he was only
too happy to uh to have his patients, you
know, basically uh confirm his wildest uh theories. So,
was he a philosopher? I would say yes, he
was a philosopher in fridge all sets. Uh They
should say someone who speculates a priority and who
doesn't uh take into account the empirical uh data.
Um So, uh and it is, I think as
such, that is right now uh in France, for
example, or in uh American uh or Anglo Saxon
uh Departments of Literature and, and Human Sciences. Uh
He's, he has these Wild theories. Um AND he
studied like Nietzsche, you know, Nietzsche had also all
kinds of psychological theories uh and also all kinds
of uh very cosmological theories about the eternal return,
et cetera, except that he never claimed to base
his ideas on facts. He never claimed that patients
had confirmed his ideas. So, uh yes, Nietzsche was
a philosopher. Um A good one, true one who
by the way, um anticipated in many ways of
Freud's concepts. And there is no question that Freud
had read Nietzsche and got a whole lot of
ideas from, from Nietzsche. Uh But again, Nietzsche's ideas
were his own uh Freud's ideas uh were his
own, but he attributed them to site, which is
so that is why many uh many commentators have
uh I've called Freud a pseudo scientist
a and even when it comes to his own
clinical material, his clinical data, isn't it the case
that he based uh all, or at least most
of it on just uh a small number of
cases?
Yeah, of course, of course. Um You could say
that's, that's not true because you have many, many
patients, hundreds of them. Um, AS far as we
know. Uh BUT it's true that uh his theories
are based on really a handful of cases that
he published on the rat man, the uh the
wolfman, et cetera, et cetera. And they basically 10
of them. Um And that's, I would say that
that's fine in a way if you could be
certain that these cases were only, you know, representative
of a much larger pool patients on which he,
he, he based his theories. Um THAT, that's not
really, so that's not really the point. The point
is that that is uh no way of validate,
verifying what he says about even these 10 cases.
Uh WHEN you, when you reads uh closely uh
some of these cases, uh you see that uh
not only are they life with, you know, suggestions.
Mhm. In, in the book I, I give no,
there's a little vignette on the little Hanson's uh
uh analysis by his father. And you see that,
you know, the poor kid was bombarded with suggestion
all the time. Uh Do you want to kill
your father? Oh, yes, dad. Oh, yes. Uh, DO
you want to sleep with someone? Oh, yes, I
would like. I would love to, I mean, this
is how it, it, it worked in Freud's, uh,
office. And so the, the, the fact that, uh,
there are just a few, uh, uh, case histories
or many, it doesn't really matter what matters is
the way he, he, he, he got his material
and the matter and the manner in which he,
he uh his ideas uh emerged within the, the
setting of his, of his office. Uh And then
there's another point to, to be made, which is
not so much that, that there are not many
case histories uh in influence would uh but it's
the fact that uh very often and we know
that now uh very often uh he would hit
on something uh that one patient said and then
immediately come up with a theory which he would
then present as a theory applying to everyone. There's
one example that is not in my book because
uh uh that my book is just about ideas.
It's not about uh his, his practice. Uh There's
one example um uh Call me that was a,
an architect in Vienna, famous architect at the time
who uh was um uh who suffered from uh
what we call manic depression. Uh And he uh
in other words, suffered from what Freud at the
time, like many others called melancholia, deep depression, clinical
depression. And then mere was in analysis with him
for just a few, few weeks. Um Freud, and
we know this because uh Karl Meyer's wife O
Mayer had a diary in which she, she, you
know, uh talked about this on a daily basis.
Freud immediately came up with a theory about uh
the fact that uh nada had uh uh decided
to, to, to, to, I would say uh to
abandon his wife as a love object or an
immediate object. And that was for Freud, the, the,
the, the cause of, uh, his, uh melancholia because
Freud has this idea that when you abandon a
love object, you identify with it and then you,
uh, attack it, you, and therefore you, you feel
depressed, you feel guilty, et cetera fried rights to
come up. Um, ON the very same day he
gets this idea and said I have solved the
problem when I call you. Mm, clearly, you know,
he just had this idea. He thought that this
case proved his point. And then that was the
beginning. That was when he wrote, uh, morning and
melancholia, which is the, the, the, the basis for
the psychoanalytic uh theory of, uh, of uh clinical
depression. Mhm. You know, uh, that is not how
you're supposed to, to work. When you come up
with a theory, you cannot base it on just
one interpretation of one person. It does work that
way.
Right. Right. Well, I, I mean, I guess that
uh if we were talking about the contemporary scientist,
he would very much be accused of scientific and
medical malpractice,
right? I mean, because come on. Absolutely. Absolutely. To
his credit. Uh HE was not the only one
at the time. He was also, you know, a
way of uh of doing before uh all these
guidelines, clinical guidelines, right? So he has excuses but
hey, uh yes, in retrospect, you can say that
he was, yeah, a frosted.
Oh OK. So uh one last question then um
how much credit do you think we can attribute
to Freud when it comes to the ideas I
basically popularized? Because I mean, you mentioned the fact
that for example, in the US, at least nowadays
people do not teach Freud anymore in, for example,
psychology, when you see it, it's mostly in uh
literary uh courses or stuff like that. But uh
many times you still see, for example, in introduction
to psychology courses, people feel the need to mention
Freud there to put him there as a sort
of important historical figure. But a as we've gone
through here, uh uh I I mean, thinking about
the people he studied under the people he corresponded
with philosophers, biologists he was influenced by, I mean,
do, do you think that if Freud didn't exist
at all that uh the uh some of the
ideas like for example, the fact that there are
many things in our minds that apparently operate at
a subconscious level. That's a big one that we
would have missed much.
First of all, fraud and psychoanalysis uh uh historically,
extremely important. I mean, the 20th century was the
Freudian century, as they say. And that is because
indeed, uh psychotherapy uh and uh at least uh
in some parts of the world. Uh AND at
certain times, psychiatry was fro um and uh I'm
sorry, the battery is low, I hope. Um So
uh very quickly, um Friday is historically important. Uh
I think that his ideas are basically rubbish or
at least they're not validated. Uh And uh but
they have had effects on, on people in the
20th century. Uh I would say, for example, the,
the, the, the, the rehabilitation, if I may say
of homosexuality, he was not the only ones but
the fact that he came up with this frank
book idea of, you know, uh bisexuality in early
childhood that allowed a lot of uh uh gay
people to come out of the closet. So, you
know, it's not because it's false, that is necessarily
um not important that that would be my answer.
OK. So the book is again, Freud's thinking and
introduction and I'm leaving a link to it in
the description of the interview. And Doctor Bcia Coben,
would you just like to mention where people can
find you and your work on the internet?
I know it's probably everywhere. No, I don't know.
It's, I, I don't have a website. I don't
do Facebook. Uh, I, I don't do that. So,
uh, I'm, I'm, I'm sorry to report. You will
have to go to a library or a bookstore
and get a hold of one of my books.
Ok. So thank you so much again for taking
the time to come on the show. It's been
a real pleasure to talk with you.
It was a pleasure for me too.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perera Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam Castle Matthew Whitting
B. No Wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors Philip
Forrest Connolly. Then the Met Robert Wine in NAI
Z Mark Nevs calling in Holbrook Field, Governor Mikel
Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger, Ken Herz
J and Lain Jung Y and the K Hes
Mark Smith J. Tom Hummel Sran David Wilson, Yasa,
dear Roman Roach Diego, Jan Punter, Romani Charlotte Bli
Nico Barba, Adam Hunt Pavlo Stassi, Nale Me, Gary
G Alman Samos, Ari and YPJ Barboza Julian Price
Edward Hall, Eden Broner Douglas Fry. Franca, Bela Gil
Cortez or Solis Scott Zachary. Ftw Daniel Friedman, William
Buckner, Paul Giorgino, Luke Loki, Georgio Theophano, Chris Williams
and Peter Wo David Williams Di A Costa Anton
Erickson Charles Murray, Alex Chao, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier,
Bangalore Larry Dey junior, Old Eon Starry Michael Bailey
then Spur by Robert Grassy Zorn, Jeff mcmahon, Jake
Zul Barnabas Radis Mark Kemple Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson,
Chris to Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica. No, Linda
Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensley Man, George Katis Valentine
Steinman, Perlis, Kate Van Goler, Alexander Abert Liam Dan
Biar Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular Janner Urla. Good enough
Gregory Hastings David Pins of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin
and Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers
is our web, Jim Frank Luca Toni, Tom Vig
and Bernard N Cortes Dixon, Bendik Muller Thomas Trumble,
Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlman, Negro, Nick Ortiz
and Nick Golden. And to my executive producers, Matthew
Lavender, Si Adrian Bogdan Knits and Rosie. Thank you
for all